# FairChess

## Try it

[Click here](https://codepen.io/mherreshoff/full/MWJGwZN) to sample from the positions generated by this script.

## Overview

Chess 960 (aka. Fischer Random Chess) tries to solve the problem that, at high levels, competive chess requires increasing amounts of memorization.  However, many of the starting positions may feel unnatural to experienced chess players.

In an attempt to avoid this problem, the _FairChess_ variant uses the same rules and starting position as ordinary chess, but randomly selects the first four moves (eight ply) from among a precalculated assortment of openings.  While [OEIS A048987]("https://oeis.org/A048987") claims there are 84,998,978,956 legal chess positions after eight ply, the vast majority are unnatural.  _FairChess_ only includes openings which consist only of moves considered relatively good moves by a chess engine, and which result in positions judged by the engine not to advantage either side very much.

My hope is that this will allow for balanced games resembling ordinary chess games sufficiently to make experienced players comfortable, while decreasing the extent to which competitive play depends on memorizing opening books.

## How to rebuild the positions yourself.

First you need to install [python3](https://www.python.org/download/releases/3.0/).  Once you have that you can install the `python-chess` library which the code depends on with the command `pip3 install python-chess`.

To build out the candidate positions run `python3 calculate.py 8` to build out the tree.  *Warning*: the script will run high-depth evaluations on many thousands of positions so this may take hours.  Finally `python3 export.py 8` will filter the results for the relatively fair positions and output a json file containing just the fair positions.
